.TH spellcrypt 1 "" "" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
.B spellcrypt \-
Spell Encrypt / Decrypt
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B spellcrypt [options] [infile] [outfile]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents the spellcrypt python utility.
.br
.SS Introduction
Encryption algorithm that creates a readable text as it's cyphertext.
.br
This disguises the fact that an encryption is used. (Discounting the fact that
the cyphertext makes limited sense.)
.br
An encryption algorithm that turns this:
.br
.RS
The greatest Enemy of Knowledge is not ignorance, it is the illusion of knowledge.
.RE
.br
Into this:
.RS
Nonagon waxy Unimplemented whitecap Clinically dionysos bussey nootka, constitutionals colb kirkwood befitting whitecap clinically.
.RE
.br
.SS How it works:
.br
A dictionary is indexed into the original file, and the indexes are \
encrypted. The new index is untangled from the dictionary, which yields a \
different text, which is outputted as syphertext. The decryption does \
the reverse.
.br
.SS Strength:
Strong enough to withstand any, but the most resource intensive attacks. \
The variable strength is also a function of the password quality. It is \
feasible to achieve strong encryption with a good quality password.
.br
.PP
.SS Spellcrypt Features:
.br
    o Simple usage
.br
    o Encryption / Decryption
.br
    o Multi platform operation (wherever python3 runs)
.br
    o GUI
.br
.SH COMMAND LINE OPTIONS

.br
Usage: spellcrypt.py [options] [infile] [outfile]
.br
Options:
.br
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
.br
  -e, --encrypt         encrypt data
.br
  -d, --decrypt         eecrypt data
.br
  -i infname, --in=infname
.br
                        read from file; use '-' for stdin
.br
  -o outfname, --out=outfname
                        write to file; stdout if no file specified.
.br
  -s instring, --str=instring
                        string to operate on (quote if space or newline)
.br
  -p pass, --pass=pass  password to use
.br
  -f, --force           force overwrite
.br
  -q, --quiet           print fewer status messages
.br
  -v, --verbose         status message verbosity
.br
  -V, --version         show version
.br
  -z, --zoo             show password quality
.br
  -g dlevel, --debug=dlevel
                        debug output level
.br
  -m dmask, --mask=dmask
                        debug output mask
.SH CAVEATS
Spellcrypt does not encrypt numbers, or words that are not found in the \
dictionary. (English dictionary for now.) This is a severe hindrance on foreign
language text.
.SH PLATFORMS
All platforms that have python3 should work fine. Current platforms include \
Linux, WinX, MSYS2 ...
.SH FILES
spellcrypt (main), soup (generate random), spemod (python library)
.SH COPYING
This project can be copied Freely, or under the MIT or General Public License
.SH AUTHOR
spellcrypt was written by Peter Glen, peterglen99@google.com
.SH SEE ALSO
See source for more details at github.com -- pglen/spellcrypt